this is a first file i create in here
I’ve wanted to write about first chapters for a while, primarily because they’re so important. After all, they’re the gateway to Chapter 2, and getting a reader to Chapter 2 is a fantastic idea.

Before I get into the elements of a powerful first chapter, let’s touch briefly on different ways to open a book.

There are actually a number of perfectly legitimate types of first chapters. Writer’s Digest has a great article by Jeff Gerke that describes 4 approaches with examples (summarized here):

The Prolog – A prolog is an episode that pertains to your story but is in some way outside your main narrative. It may look back at a time long ago, or give a glimpse of the future. It may arise from an alternate pov to the main story, or provide a glimpse of important information to set up the tale’s start. Harmony has a great series on prologs that’s worth a read, starting Here.

The Hero-Action Beginning – In a hero-action beginning, the hero is onstage, doing something active and interesting related to the story’s core or theme. It need not involve explosions and car chases, but it certainly can. This is the most common way to open a story.

The In Medias Res Beginning (in the middle of things ) – With in medias res, you start at a point deep in the story, show a bit of activity to intrigue the reader, and then you hit the rewind button and spend some, or all, of the rest of the book catching up to that moment.

The Frame Device – The final common way of beginning your first chapter is to use a frame device. In this, your story is bookended on the front and back (and usually a few instances in the middle) by a story that is outside the main story. The primary tale is framed by this other story.

With that out of the way, I went in search of tips that apply to Chapter Ones regardless of the genre, tips that I could use as I conceive of, write, and edit my stories. As usual, there are exceptions to these tips, and the list is not exhaustive.

Context: Backstory, Setting, and Detail

Avoid backstory. Include the bare minimum necessary and trickle the rest in as needed.
Don’t overdo setting. Give a smattering of strong, vibrant details to establish a sense of place and time. Then fill in the rest later as the story unfolds.
Connect the character to the setting so it isn’t just a backdrop. You might show how the character interacts with the setting.
There’s no need to skimp on details that serve the story. If your story is about snipers, give sniper details. Make sure they’re sharp and interesting. Avoid being vague. Write tight!
